# desmiler

This software is related to scientific paper "A Do-It-Yourself Hyperspectral 
Imager Brought to Practice with Open-Source Python" available at 
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/4/1072, DOI https://doi.org/10.3390/s21041072. 

## Paper abstract

Commercial hyperspectral imagers (HSIs) are expensive and thus unobtainable for large 
audiences or research groups with low funding. In this study, we used an existing 
do-it-yourself push-broom HSI design for which we provide software to correct for spectral 
mile aberration without using an optical laboratory. The software also corrects an 
aberration which we call tilt. The tilt is specific for the particular imager design 
used, but correcting it may be beneficial for other similar devices. The tilt and 
spectral smile were reduced to zero in terms of used metrics. The software artifact is 
available as an open-source Github repository. We also present improved casing for the 
imager design, and, for those readers interested in building their own HSI, we provide 
print-ready and modifiable versions of the 3D-models required in manufacturing the imager. 
To our best knowledge, solving the spectral smile correction problem without an optical 
laboratory has not been previously reported. This study re-solved the problem with 
simpler and cheaper tools than those commonly utilized. We hope that this study will 
promote easier access to hyperspectral imaging for all audiences regardless of their 
financial status and availability of an optical laboratory. 

## Notation and data format

A frame is output of one exposure of the imager. 
A cube is hyperspectral data cube consisting of consecutive frames along a scan.

Frames and cubes are expected to be in netcdf format for saving and loading. 
We use xarray Dataset and DataArray to store and manipulate the data.

## Project structure

The project structure with only the most important files listed. Note 
that some of the files are generated by the first initialization of `UI`
or by specifically calling generation function.

* ./	
	* camera_settings.toml  
	    _Camera settings to be loaded for the camera._
	* smile_env.yml  
	    _Python environment. Create running `conda env create -n smile --file 
	    smile_env.yml` in `conda` console._
	* /examples
		_Example frames are generated here by calling `ui.generate_examples()`._
		- fluorescence_spectrogram.nc  
		    _Averaged real spetra of a fluorescence tube that acts as a source for 
		    example generation._
    * /scans  
        _Created upon first intialization of the `UI` class_
        - /example_scan  
            Example cubes are generated here by calling `ui.generate_examples()`.
            - control.toml  
                _Default control file generated autmatically._
	* /src  
	    _Source code_
		- synthetic_data.py  
		    _Synthetic data generation. Responsible for example frames and cubes._
		- ui.py  
		    _Commandline user interface provided by `UI` class. 
		    This is used to access all functionality of the software._
		- /analysis  
		    _Code for visual inspection of frames and cubes._
		- /core  
		    _Code for spectral smile correction and other core functionalities._
		- /imaging  
		    _Preview and scanning session code._
		- /utilities  
		    _Utility code for various tasks. Under construction as most of the 
		    stuff is still littered among other code files._

## Imaging

To demonstrate the usage of the code, we assume an user interface object called 
`ui` has been instanced from `UI` class . This class is intended to be used in 
`ipython` console. We further assume, that a common fluorescence light tube is available to be 
used for light reference for aberration correction. We also assume that some sort of white 
reference target is available, such as white copy paper.

1. Light reference (for aberration correction)
	* point imager towards fluorescence tube
	* call `ui.shoot_light()`
2. White reference
	* point imager towards white reference using selected scanning platform
	* call `ui.shoot_white()`
3. Dark reference
	* put the lens cap on
	* call `ui.shoot_dark()`
	* remove the lens cap
4. Set scanning parameters
	* point imager towards white reference target using selected scanning platform
	* call `ui.start_preview()` 
	* take note of the illuminated sensor area and write proper cropping to the control file
	* one can also adjust the focus of the imager at this stage
	* adjust exposure time as needed by calling `ui.exposure(<value>)`
	* set scanning speed and length to the control file (using arbitrary units, 
			e.g., mm/s and mm, respectively) 	
5. Run a scan
	* run scan by calling `ui.run_scan()`. One can set 
		`is_mock_scan = 1` in control file to just print the scanning parameters 
	* take note of the actual scanning time, which is printed to the console and 
		may differ from what was desired 
		if the imager cannot provide frames fast enough with selected exposure time
6. Inspect cube
	* call `ui.show_cube()` to start the CubeInspector. It will load the raw 
		cube if no reflectance cubes are found from the file system. 
	* adjust parameters and redo the scan if needed by repeating steps 4, 5, and 6
7. Set correction parameters
	* call `ui.show_light()`, which will show the light reference shot earlier. 
		Ignore badly fitted arcs for now.
	* select some well-separated emission lines and write their x-coordinates 
		to the control file
	* call `ui.show_light()` again. Fitted arcs should now lie along 
		the actual emission lines. If this is not the case, try adjusting the emission 
		line estimates or select more prominent lines. Bad fits are usually grossly out 
		of place, so they are easy to spot.
8. Make reflectance cube
	* call `ui.make_reflectance_cube()`, which will use the dark and white 
		references shot earlier
9. Run aberration correction
	* call `ui.make_desmiled_cube()`, which will show a visual representation 
		of the shift matrix used for the correction before starting. The shift matrix should 
		be relatively smooth and values should be relatively small (our values were approx. 
		0.1 % of the sensor's width). 
10. Check the results
	* call `ui.show_cube()`, which will now load the corrected reflectance cubes 
		alongside the uncorrected one


## CubeInspector class

Interactive tool for inspecting and comparing original and desmiled hyperspectral 
image cubes. Three inspection modes: reflectance images, false color images, and 
spectral angle maps (SAM). 

### Key bindings

* Number row 1: select mode 1 (reflectance)
* Number row 2: select mode 2 (false color)
* Number row 3: select mode 3 (SAM)

Mode specific bindings

* a/d (mode 3): move spectral filter to left and right
* r (mode 3): toggle between radians and dot product

### Mouse bindings

* left click (modes 1 and 2): 
	select from which pixel the spectra are shown or 
	select band if clicked over the spectra plot
* shit + left click (any mode): 
	set first corner of SAM window, second time sets the other 
	corner and SAM is shown when mode 3 is selected. Other actions 
	after giving the first corner will unset it.
* alt: 
	while pressed, all actions are ignored, so that matplotlib's 
	own commands (such as zooming) can be used.

## Create conda environment

Create environment with conda running

```conda env create -n smile --file smile_env.yml```

in conda prompt.

Change ```create``` to ```update``` when updating.
